It's all about the tradeoffs

I saw at school the Private prison divestment campaign. Over the past couple of days, I've talked a few people about mine and their positions on divestment, and I wanted to write this post about a part of the discussion that is sometimes overlooked.

What if we assume that a university endowment is currently optimally allocated. Then, by necessity, divestment will move that endowment portfolio away from the optimal allocation, leading to poorer risk-adjusted returns over time. This is the cost of divestment. Someone must bear the costs, and if divestment did occur, who would bear them? Should the university reduce its financial aid? Should professors be paid less? Should new buildings not be built?

Of course, it's tricky to assess the impact divestment would have on a university endowment because the specific allocations of endowments are not publicly shared. There is [much more thorough work](http://www.rug.nl/research/portal/files/39000475/17001_EEF_def.pdf) looking at the effects of divestment, but I wanted to do a little thought experiment here as well.

Let's assume that instead of the myriad of investment options available today (e.g. private equity, real estate, equity, bonds, etc.), we have the global investment market comprised of the 25 most valuable companies by market capitalization.

Let's assume that the university wants to follow an indexing strategy, so it has an endowment that is invested in market-weighted proportion in these 25 equities. But, after a divestment campaign, it divests from some of them, and then reallocates proportionally the money to those remaining companies.

What kind of tracking error would divestment cause?

Creating a hypothetical portfolio of the 25 most valuable companies in the world using FT Global 500 from second quarter 2015. For some reason, Financial Times has not updated the Global 500 since. http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/91486938-2586-11dc-b338-000b5df10621.html?ft_site=falcon&desktop=true

Divestment case 1:

Divest from

- Apple (rank 1)

   Apple has been a poster child of exploitative labor practices. Although it is debatable whether Apple's practices are any worse than industry standards, by way of being the most valuable company in the computer industry (and the world), its practices are heavily scrutunized.

- Exxon Mobil (rank 2)

   Huge oil and gas corporation.

- Berkshire Hathaway (rank 3)

   Roughly
- PetroChina (rank 6)
- Wal-Mart Stores (rank 12)
- Chevron (rank 23)

In this hypothetical market, there are 25 different investment options that can be made. We assume that the market-weighted index of these 25 options is the "optimal" investment strategy. After removing the 6 companies

Tracking error over certain time period. Tracking error is calculated over returns in the given year.

Comparison of 19 stocks after divestment vs. the index fund of the 25 biggest companies.

There is more complex analysis on this topic, but I think the main point is clear.
